# Statistical analyses and mixed model analysis in R
## Code description
The first program requires the user to first provide the path to the data file they want to use, and then select one of three alternative hypotheses: two.sided - different from each other, greater - greater than the other, less - smaller than the other. The user then has five tests to choose from (the selection is made by the user entering the appropriate number assigned to a given test):
* **One-sample Student's t-test** - in the case of this test, the user is asked to select only one column from the data used (that's all that is needed to perform this test), and after selecting, the result is displayed: mean, statistic value and p-value. Unfortunately, the result issue could not be resolved as it displays a statistic value of 0 and a p-value of 0.5 every time, regardless of the data selected. The average is calculated correctly. This function takes as values the selected column, the average of this column and the selected alternative hypothesis. The function calculates the sample mean, standard deviation, sample size and degrees of freedom to then use these data in the t-test formula, from which the value of the statistic is calculated. Depending on the selected alternative hypothesis, the p-value is calculated from the appropriate formula.
* **Student's t-test for two independent samples** - in this case, the user is asked to select two columns from the used dataset as variables for analysis. The function uses the values from the selected columns (x and y, respectively) and the hypothesis selected by the user in the next step. Based on the selected data, the function calculates trial averages, standard deviation, lengths of individual trials and degrees of freedom. This data is then transferred to a formula that calculates the value of the statistic. Depending on the adopted hypothesis, the p-value is calculated based on various formulas. In this case, as output, the user receives the averages of individual trials, the statistic value and the p-value.
* **Student's t-test for two dependent samples** - it is similar to the previous one, but the test is the difference between the selected data. The sample mean, standard deviation and length are calculated based on the difference between the selected columns. Taking mu0 to be 0, we test whether there are significant differences between the pair of selected data. The calculated values from above are substituted into the formula from which the statistical value is calculated, and the p-value is calculated based on the appropriate formula, depending on the selected alternative hypothesis. The output is the average of the selected samples, the value of the statistic and the p-value from the test.
* **Linear regression** - this program, using the "ellipsis" function, allows you to perform linear regression, with the possibility of including any number of independent variables in the model. Independent variables are passed to the function in the form of an argument list. The program asks the user to select the number of independent variables they want to use in the model, then to select column by column as the appropriate independent variables, and finally to select a column as the dependent variable. Then the user must also provide an int (intercept) value. In the first step, the program prints the classes of the elements contained in the argument list to check whether they are numeric values. Then, based on the formulas, the variables and parameters of the model as well as the estimators of the variance of the random component and the variance and covariance of the regression coefficients are calculated. In the next step, the program
performs a significance test (t), calculates the value of the coefficient of determination (𝑅2) and performs a significance test (F), thereby determining the significance of the regression. As output, the user receives the calculated: beta value (parameter for estimation), p-value of the significance test t, value of the coefficient of determination, value of the significance test and p-value of the significance test F. Correctness of the data entered into the model as independent variables. is checked using a while loop - a numerical value must be provided when selecting the number of independent variables, otherwise the loop repeats the selection operation until the appropriate data is obtained.
* **Analysis of variance (ANOVA)** - this program performs a one-way analysis of variance and, using a for loop, creates dependencies between groups with significantly different means in the diff_groups variable. This program does not expect the user to make any data selection other than providing the path to the selected data file. In the case of our data, this program assumes that the alpha is the division of wines according to the origin of different crops (variable V1) and the y is the variable from V2 to V14, representing the content of various chemical substances in the wines. The program successively calculates: the variance between groups (the sum of squares, the number of degrees of freedom and the average sum of squares needed for the formula), then the total variance (the sum of squares, the number of degrees of freedom and the average sum of squares needed for the formula) and the variance within groups (the sum of squares, number of degrees of freedom and mean sum of squares needed for the formula). It then calculates the F statistic needed to calculate the p-value. The program then checks for significant differences in means between each group using a for loop. As output, the F-statistic, p-value and significant correlations between groups due to differences in means are shown.

After selecting the appropriate test, the program asks the user to provide information needed to perform a given analysis. The user has the right to choose which (in some cases even how many) columns he wants to use as appropriate variables in the selected analysis.

## Mixed model analysis
In this program I failed to create user output selection and also the problem arises with incompatible arguments which is why I failed to get the output. The program is written to estimate variance parameters (EM function) and estimate random and fixed effects (mme_2 function). The program also shows whether there are significant differences between groups and outputs random and fixed effects estimators, variance estimates, ANOVA results and whether there are significant differences between groups.
